README_PYPI.md, before:


[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/pasta-eln.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/pasta-eln)
[![GitHub version](https://badge.fury.io/gh/PASTA-ELN%2Fpasta-eln.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/gh/PASTA-ELN%2Fpasta-eln)
[![PyPi build](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/pypi.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/pypi.yml)
[![Verify Linux install](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/installLinux.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/installLinux.yml)
[![Documentation building](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/docbuild.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/docbuild.yml)
[![Linting](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/pylint.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/pylint.yml)
[![MyPy](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/mypy.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/mypy.yml)

# PASTA electronic lab notebook (ELN) | The favorite ELN for experimental scientists

Pasta-dishes are a mixture pasta and sauce, the latter adds flavors and richness to the otherwise boring pasta. This ELN combines raw-data with rich metadata to allow advanced data science. In the database, one can fully adapt and improvise the metadata definitions to generate something novel. PASTA-ELN uses a local-first approach: store all data and metadata locally (always accessible to user) and synchronize with a server upon user request.

## Location of information
More information, incl. detailed installation instructions, for users can be found on the [Github-pages](https://pasta-eln.github.io/pasta-eln/).

While people that are interested into the development are guided to [github](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/).

## Short installation instructions
``` bash
pip install pasta-eln
```

To start PASTA-ELN, use:
``` bash
pastaELN
```
which will automatically open the graphical user interface (GUI) to finish the setup.

More detail are found at the [install-page](https://pasta-eln.github.io/pasta-eln/install.html).

Commit message:

- Update readme files to include updated main text - include team and group into projectGroupConfig - update and streamline API

README_PYPI.md, after:


[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/pasta-eln.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/pasta-eln)
[![GitHub version](https://badge.fury.io/gh/PASTA-ELN%2Fpasta-eln.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/gh/PASTA-ELN%2Fpasta-eln)
[![PyPi build](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/pypi.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/pypi.yml)
[![Verify Linux install](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/installLinux.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/installLinux.yml)
[![Documentation building](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/docbuild.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/docbuild.yml)
[![Linting](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/pylint.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/pylint.yml)
[![MyPy](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/mypy.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/actions/workflows/mypy.yml)

# PASTA electronic lab notebook (ELN) | The favorite ELN for experimental scientists

PASTA-ELN (adaPtive mAterials Science meTadatA - Electronic Lab Notebook) provides a streamlined and efficient solution for experimental scientists to manage and organize raw data alongside associated metadata. By leveraging extractors that automate the processing of raw measurement files, PASTA-ELN facilitates the seamless integration of thumbnails, data, and metadata into a centralized database. These extractors can be customized and shared by users, empowering researchers to tailor their workflows to their specific needs.

## Location of information
More information, incl. detailed installation instructions, for users can be found on the [Github-pages](https://pasta-eln.github.io/pasta-eln/).

While people that are interested into the development are guided to [github](https://github.com/PASTA-ELN/pasta-eln/).

## Short installation instructions
``` bash
pip install pasta-eln
```

To start PASTA-ELN, use:
``` bash
pastaELN
```
which will automatically open the graphical user interface (GUI) to finish the setup.

More detail are found at the [install-page](https://pasta-eln.github.io/pasta-eln/install.html).
