docs/source/install.rst, before:

.. _install:

Installation and Troubleshoot Instructions
******************************************

WINDOWS
=======

Install python via Anaconda and then PASTA-ELN
----------------------------------------------

If you do not have Python installed, we recommend using Anaconda.
1. Go to https://www.anaconda.com/download
2. Download installer and run install. Accept all defaults
3. Create environment, e.g. PASTA-ELN
4. Open environment in command-prompt
5. "pip install pasta-eln"
6. "python -m pasta_eln.gui"


Manual installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If automatic installation fails
1. Manually install couchdb https://docs.couchdb.org/en/stable/install/windows.html

    - Version 3.3.3 was successfully tested
    - During the setup use the username "admin" and remember to use a long password

2. "pip install pasta-eln"
3. Make sure that the configuration file is not present: Users\...\.pastaELN.json
4. "python -m pasta_eln.installationTools install" and enter username and password
5. "python -m pasta_eln.gui" and go to configuration-setup to test the installation
    After the restart of the software, PASTA-ELN should be fully operational.

---

Sometimes an older version of PASTA-ELN is being installed because of the child requirements not being correctly
resolved. In this case you can force an update with

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install pasta-eln -U --no-dependencies


CouchDB uninstallation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Sometimes, the couchdb installation can be quite persistent when removing
1. Go to settings are remove CouchDB
2. Go through the default places are remove CouchDB

    - C:\Program Files\Apache CouchDB
    - C:\Program Files 64\Apache CouchDB



Install python via default python and then PASTA-ELN (not recommended)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

If you choose to install the default Python without Conda.
1. Go to https://www.python.org/downloads/windows/
2. Download "Windows installer" for your architecture, likely 64-bit.
3. In the installer, click "Add python.exe to PATH" at the bottom of the window.
4. Click "Install Now" in the middle of the window
5. Close

Recommendation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Afterwards, we recommend that you install some nice-to-have packages and test these installations by using the command line tool CMD.exe:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install matplotlib pandas spyder
    python.exe -c "import numpy as np;x = np.linspace(0,2*np.pi);y = np.sin(x);import matplotlib.pyplot as plt;plt.plot(x,y);plt.show()"




LINUX
=====

Requirement: add python packages
--------------------------------

Generally, Python3 is installed in all Linux distributions. Sometimes, the package installer is missing. Hence, install it along with venv:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo apt install python3-pip python3.10-venv

Install PASTA-ELN
-----------------

You can install PASTA-ELN in your normal user-space, which is the easier path, or inside an environment, which is the safer path. If PASTA-ELN does not work in the normal user-space, install in in an environment.

Install in user-space
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In any folder,

.. code-block:: bash

    pip3 install pasta-eln

which typically can take some time. Afterwards, start PASTA-ELN with

.. code-block:: bash

    pastaELN

which starts automatically the **setup** if no valid PASTA-ELN configuration is found. If the command does not start pastaELN, please use

.. code-block:: bash

    python -m pasta_eln.gui


Install in environment
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Starting in a folder of your choice but we suggest the home-folder, create a virtual environment, for instance with the name .venvPasta. (The . will ensure that it is mostly hidden.)

.. code-block:: bash

    python3 -m venv .venvPastaELN
    . .venvPastaELN/bin/activate
    pip3 install pasta-eln
    pastaELN
    deactivate

which typically can take some time and includes the **setup**. Afterwards, you can start pasta with

.. code-block:: bash

    pastaELN

or

.. code-block:: bash

    python -m pasta_eln.gui

Advanced notes if the normal setup did not succeed
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If, for whatever reason, the graphical interface does not open, one can also execute

.. code-block:: bash

    pastaELN_Install

to determine the status. To start the setup of the requirements, execute

.. code-block:: bash

    pastaELN_Install install

**ONLY DO THE NEXT STEP WHEN YOU SETUP PASTA-ELN FOR THE FIRST TIME.**

Finally, to create the example dataset, execute

.. code-block:: bash

    pastaELN_Install example

Afterwards, the normal 'pastaELN' command should work and a desktop icon should be present.

Commit message:

- improve documentation and user prompts - windows installation test for admin rights

docs/source/install.rst, after:

.. _install:

Installation and Troubleshoot Instructions
******************************************

WINDOWS
=======

Install python via Anaconda and then PASTA-ELN
----------------------------------------------

If you do not have Python installed, we recommend using Anaconda.
1. Go to https://www.anaconda.com/download
2. Download installer and run install. Accept all defaults
3. Create environment, e.g. PASTA-ELN and choose to install it with "Python 3.11..."
4. Click on new green arrow button and open "Terminal"
5. "pip install pasta-eln"
6. "pip install pasta-eln -U --no-dependencies"
    - if it complains about 'aiohttp' missing "pip install aiohttp"
6. "python -m pasta_eln.gui" (make sure that you have administrator rights)


Manual installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If automatic installation fails
1. Manually install couchdb https://docs.couchdb.org/en/stable/install/windows.html

    - Version 3.3.3 was successfully tested
    - During the setup use the username "admin" and remember to use a long password

2. "pip install pasta-eln"
3. Make sure that the configuration file is not present: Users\...\.pastaELN.json
4. "python -m pasta_eln.installationTools install" and enter username and password
5. "python -m pasta_eln.gui" and go to configuration-setup to test the installation
    After the restart of the software, PASTA-ELN should be fully operational.

---

Sometimes an older version of PASTA-ELN is being installed because of the child requirements not being correctly
resolved. In this case you can force an update with

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install pasta-eln -U --no-dependencies


CouchDB uninstallation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Sometimes, the couchdb installation can be quite persistent when removing
1. Go to settings are remove CouchDB
2. Go through the default places are remove CouchDB

    - C:\Program Files\Apache CouchDB
    - C:\Program Files 64\Apache CouchDB



Install python via default python and then PASTA-ELN (not recommended)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

If you choose to install the default Python without Conda.
1. Go to https://www.python.org/downloads/windows/
2. Download "Windows installer" for your architecture, likely 64-bit.
3. In the installer, click "Add python.exe to PATH" at the bottom of the window.
4. Click "Install Now" in the middle of the window
5. Close

Recommendation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Afterwards, we recommend that you install some nice-to-have packages and test these installations by using the command line tool CMD.exe:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install matplotlib pandas spyder
    python.exe -c "import numpy as np;x = np.linspace(0,2*np.pi);y = np.sin(x);import matplotlib.pyplot as plt;plt.plot(x,y);plt.show()"




LINUX
=====

Requirement: add python packages
--------------------------------

Generally, Python3 is installed in all Linux distributions. Sometimes, the package installer is missing. Hence, install it along with venv:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo apt install python3-pip python3.10-venv

Install PASTA-ELN
-----------------

You can install PASTA-ELN in your normal user-space, which is the easier path, or inside an environment, which is the safer path. If PASTA-ELN does not work in the normal user-space, install in in an environment.

Install in user-space
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In any folder,

.. code-block:: bash

    pip3 install pasta-eln

which typically can take some time. Afterwards, start PASTA-ELN with

.. code-block:: bash

    pastaELN

which starts automatically the **setup** if no valid PASTA-ELN configuration is found. If the command does not start pastaELN, please use

.. code-block:: bash

    python -m pasta_eln.gui


Install in environment
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Starting in a folder of your choice but we suggest the home-folder, create a virtual environment, for instance with the name .venvPasta. (The . will ensure that it is mostly hidden.)

.. code-block:: bash

    python3 -m venv .venvPastaELN
    . .venvPastaELN/bin/activate
    pip3 install pasta-eln
    pastaELN
    deactivate

which typically can take some time and includes the **setup**. Afterwards, you can start pasta with

.. code-block:: bash

    pastaELN

or

.. code-block:: bash

    python -m pasta_eln.gui

Advanced notes if the normal setup did not succeed
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If, for whatever reason, the graphical interface does not open, one can also execute

.. code-block:: bash

    pastaELN_Install

to determine the status. To start the setup of the requirements, execute

.. code-block:: bash

    pastaELN_Install install

**ONLY DO THE NEXT STEP WHEN YOU SETUP PASTA-ELN FOR THE FIRST TIME.**

Finally, to create the example dataset, execute

.. code-block:: bash

    pastaELN_Install example

Afterwards, the normal 'pastaELN' command should work and a desktop icon should be present.
